Blog post for Chrome 87: flow relative shorthands [2020-10-14] (#4018)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/logical-property-shorthands/index.md

---

> title: Logical Layout Enhancements With Flow-Relative Shorthands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Logical layout enhancements with flow-relative shorthands
```

> subhead: TODO 

Author: updated to `New logical property shorthands and new inset properties for Chromium`, thoughts?

authors:
  - adamargyle
  - loirooriol
description: TODO 
date: 2020-10-06
updated: 2020-10-06
hero: hero.png
thumbnail: thumb.png
alt: An inline flow arrow (right) and a block flow arrow (down)
tags:
  - blog
  - css
---

Since Chromium 69 (September 3rd 2018), logical properties and values have helped 
developers maintain control of their international layouts through logical, rather 
than physical, direction and dimension styles. In Chromium 87, shorthands and 
offsets have shipped to make these logical properties and values a bit easier to write.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img 
    src='./block-and-inline-visual.png' 
    alt="Latin, Hebrew and Japanese are shown rending placeholder text within a 
    device frame. Arrows and colors follow the text to help associate the 2 directions 
    of block and inline.">
</figure>

> ## Document Flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Document flow
```

If you're already familiar with logical properties, inline and block axes, and don't 
want a refresher, you can [skip ahead](#new-shorthands). Otherwise, here's a short refresher.

In English, letters & words flow left to right while paragraphs are stacked top to bottom. 
In traditional Chinese, letters and words are top to bottom while paragraphs are stacked 
right to left. In just these 2 cases, if we write CSS that puts "margin top" on a paragraph, 
we're only appropriately spacing 1 language style. If the page is translated into traditional 
Chinese from English, the margin may well not make sense in the new vertical writing mode.

Therefore the physical side of the box isn't very useful internationally. Thus begins the 
process of supporting multiple languages; learning about physical vs logical sides of the box model. 

{% Aside 'key-term' %}
A _logical property_ is one that references a side, corner or axis of the box model in context 

> of the applicable language multi-directionality. It's akin to referencing someone's `strong` arm, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the applicable language direction. It's akin to referencing someone's `strong` arm, 
```

a logical arm reference, **contextual to the individual**.
{% endAside %}

Have you ever inspected the `p` element in Chrome DevTools? If so, you might have 
noticed that the [default User Agent styles](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/rendering.html#flow-content-3:~:text=blockquote%2C%20figure%2C%20listing%2C%20p%2C%20plaintext%2C%20pre%2C,%7D) 
are not physical, but logical. 

```css
p {
  margin-block-start: 1em;
  margin-block-end: 1em;
  margin-inline-start: 0px;
  margin-inline-end: 0px;
}
```
<small>CSS from [Chromium's User Agent Stylesheet](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/blink/+/master/Source/core/css/html.css)</small>

The margin is not on the top or bottom like an English reader might believe. 
It's `block-start` and `block-end`! These logical properties are akin to an English reader's 
top and bottom, but **also** akin to a Japanese reader as right and left. Written once, works everywhere.

Normal flow is when the webpage is part of this multi-directionality intentionally. 
When page content updates according to document direction changes, the layout and its 

> elements are considered in flow. Read more about "in" and "out" flow 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
elements are considered in flow. Read more about "in" and "out" of flow 
```

[on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Flow_Layout) or in the 
[CSS Display Module spec](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-display-3/#out-of-flow). While logical properties 
are not required to be in flow, they do much of the heavy lifting for you as directionality changes. 
Flow implies direction, which letters, words and content need to travel along. 
This leads us to block and inline logical directions.

Block direction is the direction that new content blocks follow, like asking yourself, 

> "where to put the next paragraph?". A "content block", or "block of text", is a nice way 
> to associate it to yourself. Every language arranges their blocks and orders them along 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"where to put the next paragraph?". You might think of it as a "content block", or "block of text". 
Every language arranges their blocks and orders them along 
```

their respective `block-axis`. `block-start` is the side a paragraph is first placed, 
while `block-end` is the side new paragraphs flow towards. 

{% Aside 'key-term' %}
The _block direction_ is defined by the `writing-mode` property. For example, `horizontal-tb` 
(the initial value) has a vertical block axis that flows top-to-bottom (tb). Other values 
have an horizontal block axis, which can flow left-to-right (like in `vertical-lr`) or 
right-to-left (like in `vertical-rl`).
{% endAside %}

{% YouTube '5IbOpE9eVnM' %}

> {% Banner 'neutral' %}[Traditional Japanese Handwriting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5IbOpE9eVnM); block direction flows right to left{% endBanner %}

Author: what's a better way to caption a YouTube embed? that's really all the goal is.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1134620/95786741-093f5680-0c8d-11eb-9248-4c9706edf78b.png)

Inline direction is the direction that letters and words go. Consider the direction 
your arm and hand travel when you write; they are traveling along the `inline-axis`. 
`inline-start` is the side where you start writing, while `inline-end` is the side 
where writing ends or wraps. The above video, the `inline-axis` is top to bottom, 
but this next video the `inline-axis` flows right to left.

{% Aside 'key-term' %}
The _inline direction_ is defined by both `writing-mode` and `direction`. For example, 
it flows left-to-right with `horizontal-tb` and `ltr`, right-to-left with `horizontal-tb` 
and `rtl`, top-to-bottom with `vertical-lr` and `ltr`, and bottom-to-top with `vertical-rl` and `rtl`.
{% endAside %}

{% YouTube 'nTzyRdoXlbs' %}

> {% Banner 'neutral' %}[Hebrew Handwriting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nTzyRdoXlbs); inline direction flows right to left{% endBanner %}

Author: I like it there for the skimmers..?

Being [`flow-relative`](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-writing-modes-4/#logical-directions) 
means that the styles written for one language will be contextual and appropriately 
applied into other languages. Content will flow relative to the language it's being delivered for.

> ## New Shorthands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## New shorthands
```

Some of the following shorthands are not new features for the browser, rather, easier 
ways to write styles by taking advantage of being able to set values on both block 
or inline edges at once. The `inset-*` logical properties **do** bring new abilities, 
as there were no longhand ways to specify absolute positions with logical properties 
before it. Insets and shorthands flow (hehe) together so well though, I'm going to 
tell you about all of the new logical properties features landing in 87 at once. 

> ### Margin Shorthands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Margin shorthands
```

No new abilities shipped, but some super handy shorthands did: <br>
[`margin-block`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/margin-block) and 
[`margin-inline`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/margin-inline).

{% Glitch 'margin-logical-shorthand' %}

<br>

<div class="w-columns">
{% Compare 'better', 'Longhand' %}
```css
margin-block-start: 2ch;
margin-block-end: 2ch;
```
{% endCompare %}

> {% Compare 'better', 'New Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'New shorthand' %}
```

```css
margin-block: 2ch;
/* or */
margin-block: 2ch 2ch;
```
{% endCompare %}
</div>

There is no shorthand for "top and bottom" or "left and right"… until now! 
You probably reference all 4 sides using the shorthand of `margin: 10px;`, and now you 
can easily reference 2 complimentary sides by using the logical property shorthand.

<div class="w-columns">
{% Compare 'better', 'Longhand' %}
```css
margin-inline-start: 4ch;
margin-inline-end: 2ch;
```
{% endCompare %}

> {% Compare 'better', 'New Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'New shorthand' %}
```

```css
margin-inline: 4ch 2ch;
```
{% endCompare %}
</div>

> ### Padding Shorthands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Padding shorthands
```

No new abilities shipped, but more super handy shorthands did: <br>
[`padding-block`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/padding-block) and 
[`padding-inline`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/padding-inline).

{% Glitch 'padding-logical-shorthand' %}

<br>

<div class="w-columns">
{% Compare 'better', 'Longhand' %}
```css
padding-block-start: 2ch;
padding-block-end: 2ch;
```
{% endCompare %}

> {% Compare 'better', 'New Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'New shorthand' %}
```

```css
padding-block: 2ch;
/* or */
padding-block: 2ch 2ch;
```
{% endCompare %}
</div>

And the `inline` complimentary set of shorthands:

<div class="w-columns">
{% Compare 'better', 'Longhand' %}
```css
padding-inline-start: 4ch;
padding-inline-end: 2ch;
```
{% endCompare %}

> {% Compare 'better', 'New Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'New shorthand' %}
```

```css
padding-inline: 4ch 2ch;
```
{% endCompare %}
</div>

> ### Inset & Shorthands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Inset and shorthands
```

The physical properties `top`, `right`, `bottom` and `left` can all be written 
as values for the `inset` property. Any value of `position`  can benefit from 
setting sides with inset.

```css//2-5
.cover {
  position: absolute;
  top: 0;
  right: 0;
  bottom: 0;
  left: 0;
  inset: 0;
}
```

{% Glitch 'inset-logical-shorthand' %}

<br>

<div class="w-columns">

> {% Compare 'better', 'Physical Longhand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Physical longhand' %}
```

```css
position: absolute;
top: 1px;
right: 2px;
bottom: 3px;
left: 4px;
```
{% endCompare %}

> {% Compare 'better', 'New Physical Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'New physical shorthand' %}
```

```css
position: absolute;
inset: 1px 2px 3px 4px;
```
{% endCompare %}
</div>

That should look immediately convenient! Inset is shorthand for the physical sides, 
and it works just like margin and padding. 

> #### New Features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### New features
```

As exciting as the physical sides shorthand is, there's even more from the 
logical features brought by additional `inset` shorthands. These shorthands bring 
developer authoring convenience (they're shorter to type) but also increase 
the potential reach for the layout because they're flow-relative.

<div class="w-columns">

> {% Compare 'better', 'Physical Longhand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Physical longhand' %}
```

```css
position: absolute;
top: 10px;
bottom: 10px;
```
{% endCompare %}

> {% Compare 'better', 'Logical Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Logical shorthand' %}
```

```css
position: absolute;
inset-block: 10px;
```
{% endCompare %}
</div>

<br>

<div class="w-columns">

> {% Compare 'better', 'Physical Longhand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Physical longhand' %}
```

```css
position: absolute;
left: 10px;
right: 20px;
```
{% endCompare %}

> {% Compare 'better', 'Logical Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Logical shorthand' %}
```

```css
position: absolute;
inset-inline: 10px 20px;
```
{% endCompare %}
</div>

Further reading and a [full list of inset shorthand and longhand](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/inset) 
is available on MDN.

> ### Border Shorthands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Border shorthands
```

> Border, plus it's nested `color`, `style` and `width` properties have all got 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Border, plus its nested `color`, `style` and `width` properties have all got 
```

new logical shorthands as well.

> {% Glitch 'border-logical-shorthand' %}

Author: lol, great ref! resonates with me.
they're currently just native unsized buttons 🤷  so they're buttons for humans, according to your OS

oh snap, and your screenshot reminds me we should tell folks that if they dont see certain stuff that it's not in their browser yet. like, you dont see the border properly in that glitch

> {% Glitch 'border-logical-shorthand' %}

Author: after: 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1134620/95789059-a7cdb680-0c91-11eb-9b8e-efe4686879d3.png)

<br>

<div class="w-columns">

> {% Compare 'better', 'Physical Longhand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Physical longhand' %}
```

```css
border-top-color: hotpink;
border-bottom-color: hotpink;
```
{% endCompare %}

> {% Compare 'better', 'Logical Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Logical shorthand' %}
```

```css
border-block-color: hotpink;
/* or */
border-block-color: hotpink hotpink;
```
{% endCompare %}
</div>

<br>

<div class="w-columns">

> {% Compare 'better', 'Physical Longhand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Physical longhand' %}
```

```css
border-left-style: dashed;
border-right-style: dashed;
```
{% endCompare %}

> {% Compare 'better', 'Logical Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Logical shorthand' %}
```

```css
border-inline-style: dashed;
/* or */
border-inline-style: dashed dashed;
```
{% endCompare %}
</div>

<br>

<div class="w-columns">

> {% Compare 'better', 'Physical Longhand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Physical longhand' %}
```

```css
border-left-width: 1px;
border-right-width: 1px;
```
{% endCompare %}

> {% Compare 'better', 'Logical Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Logical shorthand' %}
```

```css
border-inline-width: 1px;
/* or */
border-inline-width: 1px 1px;
```
{% endCompare %}
</div>

Further reading and a [full list of border shorthand and longhand](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/border-block) 
is available on MDN.

> ## Logical Property `<figure>` Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Logical property `<figure>` example
```

Let's put it all together in a small example. Logical properties can layout 
an image with a caption to handle different writing and document directions.

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--fullbleed">
  <video playsinline controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/atoms-sandbox.google.com.a.appspot.com/logical-property-figure-demo.mp4">
  </video>
</figure> 

Or try it!

{% Glitch 'logical-figure' %}

You don't have to do much to make a card internationally responsive with a 
`<figure>` and a few logical properties. If you're curious how all this internationally 
considerate CSS works together, I hope this is a small meaningful introduction.

> ### Polyfilling & Cross Browser Support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Polyfilling and cross-browser support
```

The Cascade or build tools are viable options to have old and new browsers alike, 
properly spaced with updated logical properties. By following a physical property 

> with a logical one, the browser will use the "last" one it's found during style 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with a logical one, the browser will use the "last" property it found during style 
```

> resolution. Here's a polyfill by hand:

Reviewer 2: Is polyfill the right term here? It's more of a fallback, right? Also, I don't really understand the value of using both? With JavaScript progressive enhancements, I get it. The people with devices that support the advanced features get to use them. But here it seems like we're just duplicating code?

CC @rachelandrew 

(Sorry if you two already discussed this, I checked the Docs comments and didn't see anything)

Author: i agree that "polyfill by hand" isn't the right usage, hand written fallback is what it is. good call. 

also agree, there's no value in using both, let's fix where that caused confusion.

```css
p {
  /* for unsupporting browsers */
  margin-top: 1ch;
  margin-bottom: 2ch;
  
  /* for supporting browsers to use */
  /* and unsupporting browsers to ignore and go 🤷‍♂️ */
  margin-block: 1ch 2ch;
}
```

You could also use `@supports` to determine whether or not to provide physical 
property fallbacks:

```css
p {
  margin-top: 1ch; 
  margin-bottom: 2ch;
}

@supports (margin-block: 0) {
  p {
    margin-block: 1ch 2ch;
  }
}
```

[Sass](https://sass-lang.com), [PostCSS](https://github.com/csstools/postcss-logical), 
[Emotion](https://emotion.sh) and others have automated bundler and/or build 
time offerings that have a wide array of fallbacks or solutions. Check out each one 

> for it's strategy to see which matches your toolchain and overall site strategy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to see which matches your toolchain and overall site strategy.
```

> ## What's Next

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What's next
```

> More of CSS will offer logical properties, it's not done yet! There's 1 big missing 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More of CSS will offer logical properties, it's not done yet! There's one big missing 
```

set of shorthands though, and a resolution is still pending in this [Github issue](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/1282). 
There is a temporary solution [in a draft](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-logical/#logical-shorthand-keyword). What if you want to style all 
logical sides of a box with a shorthand?

<div class="w-columns">

> {% Compare 'better', 'Physical Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Physical shorthand' %}
```

```css
margin: 1px 2px 3px 4px;
margin: 1px 2px;
margin: 2px;
```
{% endCompare %}

> {% Compare 'better', 'Logical Shorthand' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Compare 'better', 'Logical shorthand' %}
```

```css
margin: logical 1px 2px 3px 4px;
margin: logical 1px 2px;
margin: logical 2px;
```
{% endCompare %}
</div>

The current draft proposal would mean you have to write `logical` in every 
shorthand in order to get the logical equivalent applied, which doesn't sound 
very D.R.Y. to some. There are other proposals to change it at the block or page level, 
but that could leak logical uses into styles still assuming physical sides. 

> It's a tough one! Cast your vote, voice your opinion, we want to hear from you.

Reviewer: Is it worth being explicit here how they do that? (comment on the issue).

Author: i think so! let me see if adding a couple small snippets can bring some clarity here 👍  otherwise, a comment in that thread is meaningful too
